Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: the antimicrobial drugs.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss the antimicrobials. How are the antibacterial drugs classified by
mechanism?
The antibacterial drugs are classified by the bacterial process they target.
The inhibitors of cell-wall synthesis include the beta-lactams — the penicillins,
cephalosporins and carbapenems — and the glycopeptides such as vancomycin.
The inhibitors of protein synthesis act on the bacterial ribosome and include the
aminoglycosides, the macrolides, the tetracyclines, clindamycin and linezolid.
The inhibitors of nucleic-acid synthesis or function include the fluoroquinolones,
which inhibit DNA gyrase, rifampicin, which inhibits RNA polymerase,
and metronidazole, which damages DNA.
The inhibitors of folate synthesis, needed for nucleotide production,
are the sulphonamides and trimethoprim. And some, such as the polymyxins,
disrupt the cell membrane.
So the antibacterials are classified by their target — cell wall,
protein synthesis, nucleic acid, folate metabolism, or cell membrane — which,
with their spectrum and pharmacodynamics, determines their use,
and several of these classes have specific relevance to anaesthesia.
Distinguish bactericidal from bacteriostatic,
and concentration- from time-dependent killing.
These pharmacodynamic distinctions guide the use of antibacterials.
Bactericidal agents kill the organism — the beta-lactams, glycopeptides,
aminoglycosides and fluoroquinolones — whereas bacteriostatic agents inhibit
growth, relying on host defences to clear the infection — the macrolides,
tetracyclines and others; bactericidal agents are preferred where host defences are
impaired or the infection is severe, as in endocarditis or the neutropenic patient.
The killing of some agents is concentration-dependent — the aminoglycosides,
where a high peak concentration relative to the organism maximises killing,
supporting once-daily dosing — while that of others is time-dependent — the
beta-lactams, where the time the concentration remains above the minimum inhibitory
concentration matters, supporting frequent dosing or infusion.
So the bactericidal-bacteriostatic and concentration- versus time-dependent
distinctions determine the choice and dosing — bactericidal agents for severe
infection and impaired hosts, high peaks for the aminoglycosides,
sustained levels for the beta-lactams.
Describe surgical antibiotic prophylaxis.
Surgical antibiotic prophylaxis is given to reduce surgical-site infection and is
frequently administered by the anaesthetist, so its principles are important.
The central principle is timing: the antibiotic must be given so that adequate
tissue and serum concentrations are present at the moment of incision,
conventionally within the hour before incision,
and re-dosed during prolonged surgery beyond about two half-lives or with major
blood loss.
The agent is chosen to cover the likely contaminating organisms for the type of
surgery, according to local protocols — often a cephalosporin,
with the addition of cover for specific organisms in particular operations — with
attention to the patient's allergies and to local resistance patterns.
Prophylaxis is usually a single dose, not continued unnecessarily.
So surgical antibiotic prophylaxis is timed to achieve tissue levels at incision,
with the agent matched to the surgery and the patient, re-dosed in long operations,
and not unnecessarily prolonged — an important pharmacological responsibility at
induction.
Describe vancomycin and its anaesthetic relevance.
Vancomycin is a glycopeptide that inhibits cell-wall synthesis,
used for serious infections with Gram-positive organisms,
particularly methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus and where there is
penicillin allergy.
It is given intravenously for systemic infection, being poorly absorbed orally,
except for the oral treatment of Clostridioides difficile colitis where a local gut
effect is wanted. It has several features of anaesthetic relevance.
It must be infused slowly, because rapid infusion causes histamine release with
flushing and hypotension — the so-called red-man syndrome — which is an
infusion-rate reaction rather than true allergy.
It is nephrotoxic and ototoxic, especially with other such drugs,
and has a narrow therapeutic range requiring monitoring of levels.
So vancomycin is a glycopeptide for resistant Gram-positive infection and
penicillin allergy, given by slow intravenous infusion to avoid the red-man
syndrome of rapid administration, with nephrotoxicity,
ototoxicity and the need for level monitoring as its key cautions.
Describe the aminoglycosides and their interaction with neuromuscular blockade.
The aminoglycosides, such as gentamicin and amikacin,
are bactericidal protein-synthesis inhibitors used for serious Gram-negative
infections.
Their killing is concentration-dependent, supporting once-daily dosing,
and they have a narrow therapeutic index requiring monitoring,
because their serious adverse effects are dose-related nephrotoxicity and
ototoxicity, the latter affecting both hearing and balance and sometimes
irreversible.
Of particular relevance to anaesthesia,
the aminoglycosides potentiate neuromuscular blockade:
they impair acetylcholine release at the neuromuscular junction,
prolonging and deepening the effect of neuromuscular blocking drugs and, rarely,
causing weakness in their own right,
which is important when they are given perioperatively in a patient who has
received a muscle relaxant.
So the aminoglycosides are concentration-dependent bactericidal agents for
Gram-negative infection, limited by nephro- and ototoxicity and needing monitoring,
and they potentiate neuromuscular blockade by impairing acetylcholine release — a
key anaesthetic interaction.
Describe the beta-lactams and the issue of penicillin allergy.
The beta-lactams — penicillins, cephalosporins and carbapenems — inhibit bacterial
cell-wall synthesis and are widely used bactericidal agents.
The central anaesthetic issue is penicillin allergy,
which is very commonly reported but often not a true allergy.
A careful history distinguishes true immune reactions — particularly immediate,
IgE-mediated anaphylaxis — from non-allergic intolerances such as nausea or a
remote vague rash, because labelling a patient penicillin-allergic without basis
leads to the use of less effective, broader or more toxic alternatives,
with worse outcomes and more resistance.
Where there is a true allergy, penicillins are avoided;
the cross-reactivity with cephalosporins, once overstated,
is now recognised to be low, particularly with later cephalosporins,
so a cephalosporin may often be used cautiously,
while carbapenems and alternatives exist.
So the beta-lactams are important bactericidal cell-wall inhibitors,
and penicillin allergy must be carefully assessed,
since most labels are not true allergy, the cephalosporin cross-reactivity is low,
and inaccurate labelling causes harm.
Describe metronidazole, the macrolides and the fluoroquinolones.
These have specific uses and anaesthetic-relevant effects.
Metronidazole is bactericidal against anaerobic bacteria and protozoa,
used in anaerobic and intra-abdominal infection and Clostridioides difficile;
its notable interaction is a disulfiram-like reaction with alcohol,
causing flushing, nausea and vomiting, so alcohol is avoided.
The macrolides, such as erythromycin and clarithromycin,
are protein-synthesis inhibitors used for atypical and Gram-positive infection and
in penicillin allergy; they inhibit cytochrome P450 enzymes, causing interactions,
prolong the QT interval, and erythromycin is a prokinetic through motilin agonism.
The fluoroquinolones, such as ciprofloxacin, inhibit DNA gyrase,
are broad-spectrum, and have important adverse effects — QT prolongation,
tendon damage and rupture, lowering of the seizure threshold,
and an association with aortic problems.
So metronidazole covers anaerobes with an alcohol interaction,
the macrolides cause enzyme inhibition and QT prolongation with a prokinetic
effect, and the fluoroquinolones carry QT,
tendon and seizure-threshold risks — each with effects relevant to the
perioperative period.
What is the significance of antimicrobial resistance and stewardship?
Antimicrobial resistance — the development by bacteria of mechanisms to evade
antibiotics, such as beta-lactamases,
altered targets and efflux pumps — is a major and growing threat,
producing multi-resistant organisms such as methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus and extended-spectrum beta-lactamase producers,
for which treatment options are limited,
raising the spectre of untreatable infection.
It is driven by the overuse and misuse of antibiotics.
Antimicrobial stewardship is the coordinated effort to preserve antibiotic
effectiveness by using them appropriately: prescribing only when indicated,
choosing the narrowest effective agent guided by culture and sensitivity,
using the right dose and duration, de-escalating when results return,
and not prolonging surgical prophylaxis.
The anaesthetist contributes through correct prophylaxis and judicious prescribing.
So antimicrobial resistance threatens the effectiveness of antibiotics,
driven by their misuse, and stewardship — appropriate, targeted,
time-limited use — is essential to preserve them,
a responsibility shared in perioperative practice.
What do you know of the antifungal and antiviral drugs?
These treat the other major classes of pathogen.
The antifungals include the azoles, such as fluconazole,
which inhibit fungal cell-membrane sterol synthesis and are notable inhibitors of
cytochrome P450 enzymes, causing interactions; the echinocandins,
such as caspofungin, inhibiting the fungal cell wall; and amphotericin,
which binds membrane sterols and is effective but markedly nephrotoxic and
infusion-toxic, used for serious systemic fungal infection.
The antivirals include the nucleoside analogues such as aciclovir for
herpesviruses, and the agents used against the human immunodeficiency virus — the
antiretrovirals — and against hepatitis and respiratory viruses;
the antiretrovirals have many interactions through enzyme effects.
So the antifungals — azoles, echinocandins and amphotericin — target the fungal
membrane or wall, with the azoles causing enzyme interactions and amphotericin
nephrotoxicity, and the antivirals such as aciclovir and the antiretrovirals target
viral replication, the antiretrovirals notable for their drug interactions — a
brief overview of the non-bacterial antimicrobials.
Pull it together: how do you use the antimicrobials rationally?
I would prescribe antimicrobials on the principles of appropriate,
targeted and time-limited use that underpin stewardship.
I would treat only genuine infection,
choose the agent by the likely or proven organism and its sensitivity, the site,
and the patient, preferring the narrowest effective bactericidal or bacteriostatic
agent as the situation demands, at a dose and dosing interval reflecting
concentration- or time-dependent killing, and de-escalate on culture results.
For surgical prophylaxis I would give the correct agent timed to incision,
re-dosed in long surgery and not unnecessarily prolonged.
I would assess penicillin allergy carefully rather than accept an unfounded label,
and respect the anaesthetic-relevant effects — the aminoglycoside potentiation of
neuromuscular blockade, vancomycin's red-man syndrome and the need for slow
infusion, the QT prolongation of macrolides and fluoroquinolones,
and metronidazole's alcohol interaction.
So rational antimicrobial use is targeted, appropriately dosed,
stewardship-conscious, careful about allergy,
and mindful of the specific perioperative interactions.
Describe the penicillins and their classes.
The penicillins are beta-lactam antibiotics that inhibit bacterial cell-wall
synthesis by binding the penicillin-binding proteins and are bactericidal.
They fall into classes of differing spectrum.
Benzylpenicillin and phenoxymethylpenicillin have a narrow spectrum against
streptococci and some other organisms. The aminopenicillins,
amoxicillin and ampicillin, have a broader spectrum including some Gram-negatives.
The beta-lactamase-resistant flucloxacillin is used for staphylococcal infection.
The antipseudomonal penicillins, such as piperacillin,
often combined with a beta-lactamase inhibitor such as tazobactam,
have a broad spectrum including Pseudomonas.
The beta-lactamase inhibitors, such as clavulanic acid with amoxicillin as
co-amoxiclav, extend the spectrum by protecting the penicillin from breakdown.
Their main adverse effects are allergy and gastrointestinal upset.
So the penicillins are bactericidal cell-wall inhibitors spanning narrow-spectrum
benzylpenicillin, broader aminopenicillins,
anti-staphylococcal flucloxacillin and antipseudomonal agents,
often combined with beta-lactamase inhibitors to extend their spectrum — a
versatile family limited chiefly by allergy.
Describe the cephalosporins and carbapenems.
These are the other major beta-lactam groups.
The cephalosporins are classified into generations of broadly increasing
Gram-negative and decreasing Gram-positive activity: the earlier generations,
such as cefalexin and cefuroxime, are used for many infections and surgical
prophylaxis; the later, such as ceftriaxone and cefotaxime,
have broad activity used in serious infection and meningitis,
and ceftazidime against Pseudomonas.
They share the beta-lactam mechanism and are associated with Clostridioides
difficile infection.
The carbapenems, such as meropenem and imipenem,
are very broad-spectrum beta-lactams reserved for serious and resistant infections,
including those producing extended-spectrum beta-lactamases.
The cross-reactivity of cephalosporins and carbapenems with penicillin allergy,
once feared to be high, is now recognised to be low,
particularly with the later cephalosporins.
So the cephalosporins span generations of increasing Gram-negative cover used
widely including for prophylaxis, and the carbapenems are very broad-spectrum
agents reserved for serious resistant infection,
both beta-lactams with low cross-reactivity with penicillin allergy.
Detail the dosing and monitoring of the aminoglycosides.
The aminoglycosides, such as gentamicin,
are dosed to exploit their concentration-dependent killing and to minimise their
dose-related toxicity, which requires careful regimens and monitoring.
Because their bactericidal effect depends on a high peak concentration relative to
the organism, and because they show a post-antibiotic effect,
they are usually given as a single large daily dose,
which maximises the peak for efficacy while allowing the level to fall between
doses, reducing the accumulation that drives nephro- and ototoxicity.
The dose is based on body weight and renal function.
Monitoring is essential: trough levels are measured to ensure the drug has cleared
sufficiently between doses, confirming it is not accumulating,
with the regimen adjusted accordingly, and renal function is followed.
So the aminoglycosides are given as a single large daily dose to maximise the peak
for concentration-dependent killing while allowing clearance between doses to limit
toxicity, with monitoring of trough levels and renal function to prevent the
nephro- and ototoxicity that limit them.
Describe the macrolides, clindamycin and linezolid.
These protein-synthesis inhibitors have particular uses and cautions.
The macrolides — erythromycin, clarithromycin and azithromycin — are used for
respiratory, atypical and Gram-positive infection and in penicillin allergy;
they inhibit cytochrome P450, causing interactions, prolong the QT interval,
and erythromycin is a gastric prokinetic through motilin agonism.
Clindamycin is effective against Gram-positives and anaerobes,
used in soft-tissue and dental infection,
but is notably associated with Clostridioides difficile colitis.
Linezolid is an oxazolidinone active against resistant Gram-positives such as
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus and resistant enterococci; importantly,
it is a weak monoamine oxidase inhibitor,
so it can cause serotonin syndrome with serotonergic drugs and interacts with
sympathomimetics, and with prolonged use causes bone-marrow suppression.
So the macrolides cause enzyme inhibition and QT prolongation with a prokinetic
effect, clindamycin carries a high Clostridioides difficile risk,
and linezolid treats resistant Gram-positives but acts as a monoamine oxidase
inhibitor with serotonin-syndrome and marrow risks — each with specific cautions.
How should a reported penicillin allergy be assessed and acted upon?
A reported penicillin allergy should be carefully assessed rather than accepted at
face value, because the great majority of such labels are not true allergy,
and an inaccurate label leads to the use of broader,
less effective or more toxic alternatives, with worse outcomes and more resistance.
The assessment takes a detailed history:
the nature of the reaction — distinguishing a true immediate,
IgE-mediated reaction such as urticaria, angioedema or anaphylaxis,
or a severe delayed reaction such as a blistering rash,
from non-allergic intolerances such as nausea, diarrhoea or a vague remote rash;
the timing and the drug involved; and the consequences.
Where the history suggests true allergy,
penicillins are avoided and a suitable alternative chosen,
noting that cephalosporin cross-reactivity is low.
Where it suggests intolerance, penicillins may be used.
Formal allergy testing or de-labelling pathways clarify uncertain cases.
So a reported penicillin allergy is assessed by a careful history distinguishing
true allergy from intolerance, avoiding penicillins only for genuine allergy,
recognising low cephalosporin cross-reactivity, and de-labelling where appropriate.
How are antimicrobials used in sepsis?
In sepsis, the timely and appropriate use of antimicrobials is central to survival,
alongside resuscitation and source control.
The principle is to give effective broad-spectrum antibiotics early — promptly
after recognition, within the first hour in septic shock — because delay increases
mortality, after taking blood and other cultures to allow later targeting.
The initial empirical choice is broad,
to cover the likely organisms for the presumed source and the local resistance
patterns, at full doses adjusted for organ function,
recognising that the altered physiology of sepsis changes drug handling.
Once culture and sensitivity results return,
treatment is de-escalated to the narrowest effective agent,
and the duration is kept to the shortest effective course.
Source control — drainage or removal of the focus — is essential.
So in sepsis, broad-spectrum antibiotics are given early after cultures,
at full adjusted doses, then de-escalated on results to the narrowest effective
agent for the shortest course, with source control — early appropriate therapy
being a key determinant of outcome.
What is the relevance of antibiotics to perioperative anaphylaxis?
Antibiotics are highly relevant to perioperative anaphylaxis because they have
become a leading cause of it.
As surgical antibiotic prophylaxis is commonly given around the time of induction,
an anaphylactic reaction to the antibiotic, particularly a beta-lactam,
may occur and be mistaken for a reaction to an anaesthetic drug; indeed,
in recent audits antibiotics, with the neuromuscular blocking agents,
are among the commonest triggers of perioperative anaphylaxis.
The implications are to give the antibiotic, where possible,
before induction or sufficiently separated from other drugs so that the cause of
any reaction can be identified, to take a careful allergy history,
and to recognise and treat anaphylaxis promptly with adrenaline.
Subsequent investigation with referral for allergy testing identifies the culprit.
So antibiotics, especially the beta-lactams,
are a leading cause of perioperative anaphylaxis,
which is why a careful allergy history, thoughtful timing of administration,
and prompt recognition and treatment, with later allergy testing,
are important — a key anaesthetic safety consideration.
Describe metronidazole and the nitroimidazoles more fully.
Metronidazole, the principal nitroimidazole,
is bactericidal against anaerobic bacteria and active against several protozoa.
Its mechanism is distinctive: it is reduced within the anaerobic organism to a
reactive intermediate that damages the microbial DNA,
which is why it acts selectively on anaerobes and microaerophilic organisms.
It is used in anaerobic and intra-abdominal and pelvic infection,
in combination for Helicobacter eradication, for Clostridioides difficile colitis,
and for protozoal infections such as amoebiasis and giardiasis.
Its well-known interaction is a disulfiram-like reaction with alcohol — flushing,
nausea, vomiting and headache — so alcohol is avoided during and shortly after
treatment; prolonged use can cause peripheral neuropathy,
and it has central effects at high doses.
So metronidazole is reduced within anaerobes to a DNA-damaging intermediate,
giving selective activity against anaerobic bacteria and protozoa,
used in anaerobic, intra-abdominal and protozoal infection,
with the disulfiram-like alcohol reaction and, with prolonged use,
peripheral neuropathy as its notable adverse effects.
Describe the mechanisms of antimicrobial resistance.
Bacteria resist antibiotics by several mechanisms,
which may be intrinsic or acquired,
the latter through mutation or the transfer of resistance genes on plasmids,
allowing rapid spread.
The principal mechanisms are: enzymatic inactivation of the drug — the
beta-lactamases that destroy penicillins and cephalosporins being the classic
example, including the extended-spectrum beta-lactamases and carbapenemases that
defeat even broad agents; alteration of the drug target so that it no longer binds
— as in the altered penicillin-binding protein of methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus and the altered target in vancomycin resistance;
reduced accumulation of the drug, by decreased permeability or active efflux pumps
that expel it; and bypass of the inhibited pathway.
These mechanisms, spread by gene transfer and selected by antibiotic exposure,
produce the multi-resistant organisms that threaten treatment.
So resistance arises by enzymatic drug inactivation, target alteration,
reduced drug accumulation through efflux or impermeability, and pathway bypass,
spread by mutation and gene transfer and selected by antibiotic use — the basis of
the resistance threat that stewardship addresses.
Give a final integrated account of rational antimicrobial use.
I would prescribe antimicrobials on stewardship principles of appropriate,
targeted and time-limited use.
I would treat only genuine infection, take cultures,
and choose the agent by the likely or proven organism and its sensitivity,
the site and the patient, preferring the narrowest effective agent,
bactericidal where the infection is severe or the host impaired,
at a dose and interval reflecting concentration- or time-dependent killing and
adjusted for organ function, de-escalating on results and using the shortest
effective course.
In sepsis I would give broad cover early after cultures, then de-escalate,
with source control. For surgical prophylaxis I would give the correct agent timed
to incision, re-dosed in long surgery, not prolonged.
I would assess penicillin allergy carefully,
recognise antibiotics as a leading cause of perioperative anaphylaxis,
and respect the anaesthetic-relevant effects — aminoglycoside potentiation of
neuromuscular blockade, vancomycin's red-man syndrome,
the QT effects of macrolides and fluoroquinolones,
and metronidazole's alcohol interaction.
So rational use is targeted, appropriately dosed,
stewardship-conscious and mindful of allergy and perioperative interactions.
Describe the tetracyclines.
The tetracyclines, such as doxycycline and the older tetracycline,
are bacteriostatic protein-synthesis inhibitors that bind the bacterial ribosome,
with a broad spectrum including atypical organisms, intracellular pathogens,
and use in respiratory infection, acne,
and conditions such as Lyme disease and rickettsial and chlamydial infection.
Their characteristic features are several.
They chelate divalent and trivalent cations — calcium, magnesium, aluminium,
iron — so their absorption is reduced by dairy products, antacids and iron,
taken separately; and because they bind calcium in developing bone and teeth,
they cause permanent staining of teeth and are avoided in children under about
eight and in pregnancy.
They cause photosensitivity and gastrointestinal upset.
So the tetracyclines are broad-spectrum bacteriostatic ribosomal inhibitors useful
for atypical and intracellular infections,
notable for chelation reducing their absorption with cations,
contraindication in young children and pregnancy because of dental and bone
deposition, and photosensitivity — a class with distinctive practical cautions.
Describe trimethoprim and the sulphonamides.
Trimethoprim and the sulphonamides act on the bacterial folate pathway,
which is required for nucleotide and so DNA synthesis.
The sulphonamides, such as sulfamethoxazole,
inhibit an early step of folate synthesis,
and trimethoprim inhibits dihydrofolate reductase later in the pathway;
combined as co-trimoxazole, they block the pathway sequentially for a synergistic
effect.
Trimethoprim alone is used for urinary infection.
Co-trimoxazole is used for particular infections,
notably Pneumocystis pneumonia in the immunocompromised,
both for treatment and prophylaxis.
Their adverse effects include rash, including serious skin reactions,
bone-marrow suppression and folate-related effects,
hyperkalaemia from trimethoprim, and, with sulphonamides, hypersensitivity;
trimethoprim is avoided in early pregnancy as a folate antagonist.
So trimethoprim and the sulphonamides block the bacterial folate pathway,
combined as synergistic co-trimoxazole used notably for Pneumocystis pneumonia,
with rash, marrow suppression, hyperkalaemia and the folate-antagonist caution in
pregnancy as their key adverse effects.
Detail vancomycin level monitoring.
Vancomycin has a narrow therapeutic index,
with efficacy depending on adequate exposure and toxicity — chiefly nephrotoxicity
— on excessive levels, so it is monitored.
Historically, trough concentrations were measured before a dose to ensure they lay
within a target range, high enough for efficacy against organisms such as
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus but not so high as to risk
nephrotoxicity.
More recent guidance favours targeting the ratio of the area under the
concentration-time curve to the organism's minimum inhibitory concentration as a
better predictor of efficacy and safety,
estimated from levels using pharmacokinetic methods.
Dosing is by weight and renal function, with a loading dose for serious infection,
and renal function is monitored.
So vancomycin is monitored because of its narrow index,
traditionally by trough levels and increasingly by the area-under-the-curve to
minimum-inhibitory-concentration ratio,
with weight- and renal-function-based dosing and monitoring of renal function,
to balance efficacy against nephrotoxicity.
Describe rifampicin and its enzyme induction.
Rifampicin is a bactericidal antibiotic that inhibits bacterial RNA polymerase,
used principally in the treatment of tuberculosis,
always in combination to prevent resistance,
and for some other infections and prophylaxis.
Its most relevant pharmacological feature is that it is one of the most potent
inducers of the hepatic cytochrome P450 enzymes,
dramatically accelerating the metabolism of a wide range of co-administered drugs
and so reducing their effect — including oral contraceptives, warfarin,
many anticonvulsants, corticosteroids,
and others — a major source of clinically important interactions that must be
anticipated.
It also characteristically colours the urine,
tears and other secretions orange-red, and can cause hepatotoxicity.
So rifampicin is a bactericidal RNA-polymerase inhibitor central to tuberculosis
treatment, notable above all as a powerful enzyme inducer that accelerates the
metabolism of many drugs and reduces their effect,
requiring anticipation of interactions,
and for the harmless orange discoloration of secretions and the risk of
hepatotoxicity.
How is Clostridioides difficile infection treated?
Clostridioides difficile infection,
a colitis caused by toxin-producing overgrowth of the organism after antibiotics
have disrupted the normal gut flora,
is treated by addressing the cause and giving specific antimicrobials.
The first step is to stop the precipitating antibiotic where possible and to
institute infection-control measures, as it is readily transmissible.
The specific treatment is oral antibiotics that act within the gut lumen:
oral vancomycin or fidaxomicin are now first-line, having replaced metronidazole,
which is less effective and reserved for milder or specific cases.
For recurrent infection, fidaxomicin and faecal microbiota transplantation,
which restores the normal flora, are used. Severe,
fulminant disease may require surgery. Supportive care and fluid management are
important.
So Clostridioides difficile infection is treated by stopping the causative
antibiotic, infection control, and oral vancomycin or fidaxomicin as first-line
specific therapy, with faecal microbiota transplantation for recurrence —
metronidazole now second-line — reflecting the disruption of gut flora that
underlies it.
How is surgical antibiotic prophylaxis tailored to the type of operation?
Surgical antibiotic prophylaxis is tailored to the likely contaminating organisms
of the operative site, following local protocols.
For clean surgery not entering a colonised viscus,
prophylaxis targets skin organisms, chiefly staphylococci,
often with a cephalosporin or, for methicillin-resistant organisms or allergy,
a glycopeptide.
For clean-contaminated surgery entering the respiratory,
genitourinary or gastrointestinal tract,
the cover is broadened to the resident flora — for colorectal surgery, for example,
cover against Gram-negatives and anaerobes, adding an agent such as metronidazole.
The need for prophylaxis itself depends on the wound class and the consequences of
infection, being routine where prosthetic material is implanted.
Timing to incision, re-dosing in long surgery,
and not prolonging the course apply throughout.
So surgical prophylaxis is matched to the operative site's likely organisms —
staphylococcal cover for clean surgery,
broadened to include Gram-negatives and anaerobes for surgery entering the bowel —
with the agent, the need, and the timing determined by the operation and local
protocol.
How is antibiotic dosing altered in renal impairment and in critical illness?
Antibiotic dosing must be adjusted for altered drug handling in renal impairment
and in critical illness to maintain efficacy and avoid toxicity.
In renal impairment, renally excreted antibiotics — the aminoglycosides,
glycopeptides, many beta-lactams — accumulate,
so the dose or frequency is reduced and levels monitored where relevant,
to avoid toxicity, while ensuring adequate exposure.
In critical illness the picture is more complex:
there may be augmented renal clearance in the hyperdynamic early phase,
increasing the elimination of renally cleared drugs so that standard doses give
sub-therapeutic levels and underdosing;
an expanded volume of distribution from fluid resuscitation and capillary leak,
lowering the concentration of hydrophilic drugs; and changing organ function.
This argues for higher or front-loaded doses,
extended or continuous infusions of time-dependent agents such as beta-lactams,
and therapeutic drug monitoring.
So antibiotic dosing is reduced for accumulation in renal impairment,
but in critical illness augmented clearance and an expanded volume of distribution
often require higher or front-loaded doses,
extended infusions and monitoring to avoid underdosing — individualised to the
altered pharmacokinetics.
Describe the antifungal drugs more fully.
The antifungals target structures unique to fungi.
The azoles — fluconazole, voriconazole, itraconazole,
posaconazole — inhibit the synthesis of ergosterol, the fungal membrane sterol,
and are used for candidal and other fungal infections,
fluconazole widely for candidiasis;
they are notable inhibitors of human cytochrome P450 enzymes,
causing many drug interactions, and some prolong the QT interval.
The echinocandins — caspofungin, anidulafungin,
micafungin — inhibit the synthesis of the fungal cell-wall component beta-glucan,
are effective against Candida and Aspergillus,
and are well tolerated with few interactions,
increasingly first-line for serious candidaemia.
Amphotericin binds fungal membrane ergosterol,
is broad and effective for serious systemic mycoses but markedly nephrotoxic and
infusion-toxic, mitigated by lipid formulations.
So the antifungals comprise the azoles,
inhibiting ergosterol synthesis with important enzyme interactions;
the well-tolerated echinocandins, inhibiting the cell wall and increasingly
first-line for serious candidal infection; and amphotericin,
effective but nephrotoxic — each targeting fungal-specific structures.
Describe the antiviral drugs more fully.
The antivirals inhibit specific steps of viral replication and are virus-specific.
For the herpesviruses, the nucleoside analogue aciclovir, and related agents,
are activated within infected cells and inhibit viral DNA polymerase,
used for herpes simplex and varicella-zoster infection,
with ganciclovir for cytomegalovirus.
For the human immunodeficiency virus,
combination antiretroviral therapy targets several steps — reverse transcriptase,
protease and integrase inhibitors — controlling the virus;
these have numerous drug interactions,
the protease inhibitors particularly through potent enzyme inhibition,
important to anticipate perioperatively.
For hepatitis B and C, nucleotide analogues and the direct-acting antivirals have
transformed treatment. For influenza,
the neuraminidase inhibitors such as oseltamivir,
and newer agents for respiratory viruses, are used.
So the antivirals are virus-specific — aciclovir and analogues for herpesviruses,
combination antiretroviral therapy for the human immunodeficiency virus with major
interactions, direct-acting antivirals for hepatitis,
and neuraminidase inhibitors for influenza — inhibiting defined steps of viral
replication, with the antiretrovirals' interactions of particular perioperative
note.
Summarise the principles of antimicrobial choice in the perioperative and
critically ill patient.
I would choose antimicrobials by integrating the likely or proven pathogen,
the site and severity of infection, the patient's factors and allergies,
and the altered pharmacokinetics of the perioperative and critically ill state,
all within stewardship.
I would treat genuine infection promptly — broad and early in sepsis after
cultures, then de-escalated on sensitivities to the narrowest effective agent for
the shortest course, with source control.
I would dose to the pharmacodynamics — high peaks for the aminoglycosides,
sustained levels or extended infusions for the beta-lactams — adjusting for renal
impairment to avoid accumulation but recognising that augmented clearance and an
expanded volume of distribution in critical illness often demand higher or
front-loaded doses and monitoring.
I would assess penicillin allergy carefully,
give surgical prophylaxis correctly timed and matched to the operation,
and respect the anaesthetic-relevant interactions.
So perioperative and critical-care antimicrobial choice is pathogen- and
site-directed, stewardship-conscious,
dosed to the pharmacodynamics and the altered pharmacokinetics,
and mindful of allergy and interactions.
What agents are available for resistant Gram-positive infection beyond vancomycin?
Beyond vancomycin, several agents treat resistant Gram-positive organisms such as
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus and resistant enterococci.
Teicoplanin is a glycopeptide similar to vancomycin but with a longer half-life
allowing once-daily dosing and less need for infusion-rate precautions.
Daptomycin is a lipopeptide that disrupts the bacterial cell membrane,
bactericidal against resistant Gram-positives and used for bacteraemia and
endocarditis, but it is inactivated by lung surfactant so is not used for
pneumonia, and it can cause a myopathy with a raised creatine kinase,
requiring monitoring.
Linezolid, the oxazolidinone, treats resistant Gram-positives and is well absorbed
orally, but acts as a monoamine oxidase inhibitor and causes marrow suppression
with prolonged use. Newer agents include ceftaroline and the long-acting
lipoglycopeptides.
So resistant Gram-positive infection can be treated with teicoplanin,
daptomycin — not for pneumonia and with a myopathy risk — and linezolid,
with its monoamine-oxidase and marrow cautions, among newer agents,
providing alternatives to vancomycin guided by the infection and the organism.
Explain the post-antibiotic effect and antibiotic combinations.
The post-antibiotic effect is the persistent suppression of bacterial growth that
continues after the antibiotic concentration has fallen below the minimum
inhibitory concentration, varying by drug and organism;
it is prominent with the aminoglycosides and fluoroquinolones against
Gram-negatives, and it permits dosing regimens, such as once-daily aminoglycosides,
that allow the level to fall between doses while maintaining effect.
Antibiotic combinations are used for several reasons: to achieve synergy,
where two drugs together are more effective than the sum of each,
as with a beta-lactam and an aminoglycoside in serious infection such as
endocarditis; to broaden the spectrum in empirical treatment of severe infection;
and to prevent the emergence of resistance, as in tuberculosis treatment.
Combinations may occasionally be antagonistic.
So the post-antibiotic effect is the continued growth suppression after levels
fall, supporting regimens such as once-daily aminoglycosides,
and antibiotic combinations are used for synergy,
broadened spectrum and the prevention of resistance — both principles informing how
antibiotics are dosed and combined.
Summarise, finally, the anaesthetist's key concerns with antimicrobials.
Drawing the anaesthetist's concerns together: first,
surgical antibiotic prophylaxis — giving the correct agent,
matched to the operation and the patient's allergy status,
timed to be present at incision, re-dosed in long surgery, and not prolonged.
Second, allergy — taking a careful penicillin-allergy history,
recognising that most labels are not true allergy and that cephalosporin
cross-reactivity is low, and recognising antibiotics, especially beta-lactams,
as a leading cause of perioperative anaphylaxis to be promptly treated.
Third, the anaesthetic-relevant drug effects — the aminoglycoside potentiation of
neuromuscular blockade, vancomycin's red-man syndrome and need for slow infusion,
the QT prolongation of macrolides and fluoroquinolones,
metronidazole's alcohol reaction, and the enzyme induction of rifampicin and
interactions of others.
Fourth, appropriate dosing for renal function and the altered pharmacokinetics of
critical illness, and stewardship.
So the anaesthetist's key antimicrobial concerns are correct prophylaxis,
careful allergy assessment and anaphylaxis readiness,
the specific perioperative drug interactions,
and appropriate dosing and stewardship — a practical synthesis of the pharmacology.
Thank you. A thorough and well-structured account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Antibacterials are classified by target: cell wall (beta-lactams,
glycopeptides), protein synthesis (aminoglycosides, macrolides, tetracyclines,
clindamycin, linezolid), nucleic acid (fluoroquinolones, rifampicin,
metronidazole), folate (sulphonamides, trimethoprim) and cell membrane.
Second, Bactericidal agents (beta-lactams, glycopeptides, aminoglycosides,
fluoroquinolones) are preferred in severe infection and impaired hosts;
killing is concentration-dependent (aminoglycosides — high peaks,
once-daily) or time-dependent (beta-lactams — sustained levels above the MIC).
Third, Surgical prophylaxis must be timed to achieve tissue levels at incision
(within the hour before), re-dosed in long surgery,
matched to the operation and patient, and not unnecessarily prolonged;
assess reported penicillin allergy carefully,
as most labels are not true allergy and cephalosporin cross-reactivity is low.
Fourth, Anaesthetic-relevant effects:
aminoglycosides potentiate neuromuscular blockade (impaired ACh release) and are
nephro/ototoxic; vancomycin needs slow infusion (red-man syndrome) and is
nephro/ototoxic; macrolides and fluoroquinolones prolong the QT (fluoroquinolones
also tendon/seizure risk); metronidazole has a disulfiram-like alcohol reaction.
5.
Antimicrobial resistance (beta-lactamases, altered targets,
efflux) is a growing threat driven by misuse;
stewardship — treating only genuine infection with the narrowest effective agent at
the right dose and duration, de-escalating on cultures — preserves effectiveness,
a shared perioperative responsibility.
Thank you. That concludes the station.